CNN Covering For DNC Corruption?

by Jeff Powers in Opinion Jun 27, 2017

We should have known this hysteria would come after election night.

All one needs to do is look at the District of Columbia voting results to understand that President’s Trump’s campaign promise to Drain The Swamp would rouse every sordid creature from the depths of D.C..

The Russia Hysteria

The backbone of the Russian hysteria story has been built exclusively on two sources, both of which have been debunked and characterized as false.

The substance of this hysteria has been parroted by the mainstream media (MSM), lawmakers, and the Intelligence community. The goal all along by these groups has been twofold:

Deflect any tie to the DNC and their involvement in the leaks that harmed the Clinton candidacy and forced the removal of the chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz.

And delegitimize the Trump presidency.

Russia Source No. 1: Fusion GPS

The now debunked Russian dossier was brought forward by the consulting firm, Fusion GPS.

Follow IVN

Email

Go

The backbone of the Russian hysteria story has been built exclusively on 2 debunked sources.

Fusion GPS is a D.C. group with deep ties to Hillary Clinton and the DNC. The group is now stonewalling congressional queries into their practices.

The New York Post wrote a recent piece detailing those connections and why the dossier is nothing more than a piece of science fiction designed to damage the president.

Russia Source No. 2: CrowdStrike

Another Democratic operative is the CrowdStrike crew.

CrowdStrike was the group who gained exclusive access to the DNC servers after the hack, then claimed Russia was to blame. Typically, if a foreign power gains access to sensitive information, like the damaging DNC emails, it’s a felony.

In the June 21 House Intelligence Committee hearing, Rep. Trey Gowdy noted, “The DNC was the victim of a crime. I’m trying to understand why the victim of a crime would not turn over evidence to [the DHS] and [then-FBI Director] Jim Comey.”

To Gowdy’s point. Not only was the information not turned over, the DHS chief testified that the Department of Homeland Security and FBI were not even allowed access to the servers.

Think Tanks from around the globe have debunked CrowdStrike’s conclusion that Russian operatives hacked the DNC.

Jeh Johnson's Testimony

The “Russian House of Cards” conspiracy took a big hit on June 21.

The testimony by former DHS chief Jeh Johnson was a game-changer.

The DNC was the victim of a crime. I’m trying to understand why the victim of a crime would not turn over evidence to (the DHS) and (then-FBI Director) Jim Comey.

US Rep. Trey Gowdy

For the first time under oath, an Obama official placed the glaring hacking spotlight not on Russia, but on the DNC.

When questioned about not being allowed access to the DNC servers, Johnson replied, “I recall very clearly that I was not pleased that we were not in there helping them patch this vulnerability.”

If in fact a crime was committed by Russia, and if in fact it was democracy shuttering, and if in fact it was designed to destroy Hillary Clinton’s candidacy, why didn’t President Obama respond?

The Otherside Documentary: A Liberal Democrat Explores Conservative America

Instead, according to the Washington Post piece, Obama sat on this information for months because he didn’t want to “influence the outcome of the election.”

Huh?

The reaction to Johnson’s testimony was extraordinary and expectedly over the top:

Within an hour of Johnson’s testimony, Debbie Wasserman Schultz was on CNN calling him a liar

Two days later, Harvard published a poll noting the public was tiring of the subject of Russia meddling

Two days later, The Washington Post wrote a long essay hailing Obama as a courageous man who was torn as to what to do about the Russian hack. Indeed calling it, “the political crime of the Century.”

'Cutesy Little Ethics'

“All the nice cutesy little ethics that used to get talked about in journalism school, you’re just like, that’s adorable. That’s adorable. This is a business,” said CNN Supervising Producer John Bonifield.

As noted by the incredible undercover video with a CNN producer, what we’re ingesting isn’t news, it’s mock outrage. It is orchestrated by the Washington one percent, and carried out and colluded by anchors, reporters, and lawmakers working hard to keep the D.C. power structure in place.

All the nice cutesy little ethics that used to get talked about in journalism school, you’re just like, that’s adorable...This is business.

CNN Supervising Producer John Bonifield

A Media Research Center study of every evening newscast since the appointment of special counsel Robert Mueller on May 17 found 353 minutes of airtime devoted to the Russia probe.

That’s 55 percent of all coverage of the Trump presidency during those weeks dedicated to a

“mostly bulls*** story.”

Forget tax reform, health care, Syria, jobs and infrastructure.

No, let’s focus on delegitimizing the president because he isn’t “our guy.”

What's Next

As noted in a piece written by IVN, we should be watching what happens with the Wasserman Schultz investigation.

We should be paying close attention to the investigation into former Attorney General Loretta Lynch.

And perhaps, if the Senate Intelligence Committee has real stones, and as noted by the former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, Congress should subpoena Barack Obama.
